Why is our authentication status ignored when we try to fetch data?
Well because just because we know that we are authenticated and that we have that token somewhere in
our user object, Firebase doesn't know that, we're not attaching it to that outgoing request and therefore
Firebase has no chance of understanding that we have a valid token.
We need to add that token to the outgoing request to let Firebase know about that and for that, we need
to manipulate our outgoing HTTP requests that are related to data storing and fetching.
Hence we need to look into the data storage service, where we have fetch recipes and store recipes
and these requests here now need to be edited such that we do attach our token to them, the token we
are storing in the user object in the auth service.
For that, let's inject that auth service here into the data storage service, of course make sure you add the import
path and now we need to get access to the user in both store recipes and fetch recipes
because we need to get the token there.
Now we could set up a subscription to the user but I don't care about every change to the user,
instead when we try to store or fetch recipes, I just want to get the token of the currently authenticated
user,
I don't want to have an ongoing subscription. Hence in the auth service, we now should also store the token
or the user in a way that we can access it through different means, so not through a subject which is
great for reactively updating the user interface but that we also have a way of on-demand fetching
of the user data.
Now there are a couple of different ways of achieving that,
since we're only interested in the token, we could just store the token here in a variable which is null
initially and which will hold a string eventually, where we set the token whenever we also emit a new
subject,
that would be possible and wouldn't be wrong but we can actually also use a different type of subject
here.
This subject is a subject to which we can subscribe and we'll get information whenever new data is emitted.
Now actually, there is a different type of subject RxJS offers which is called behavior subject.
Now this is also imported from RxJS and generally, it behaves just like the other subject,
which means we can call next, to emit a value and we can subscribe to it to be informed about new values.
The difference is that behavior subject also gives subscribers immediate access to the previously
emitted value even if they haven't subscribed at the point of time that value was emitted.
That means we can get access to be currently active user even if we only subscribe
after that user has been emitted.
So this means when we fetch data and we need that token at this point of time, even if the user logged
in before that point of time which will have been the case, we get access to that latest user.
Now therefore behavior subject also needs to be initialized with a starting value, which in my case
will be null here,
it has to be a user object and null is a valid replacement because I don't want to start off with a
user.
Now we don't need to change anything in the auth service,
we still emit our user as we do before with the next function but in our data storage service, now we
can reach out to the auth service user, get the currently active user and be done with that
and that's just what I want to do here, for example when we fetch recipes. So here, we reach out to the
auth service, there to the user
and now the thing just is I don't want to set up an ongoing subscription and still I need to subscribe
to get that user,
so to make sure I only get the user once and thereafter I'm done,
of course we could manually immediately call unsubscribe thereafter or you use pipe and then a special
operator RxJS gives you
and that would be the take operator. Take is also imported from rxjs/operator and take is
called as a function and you simply pass a number to it and I pass one here
and what this tells RxJS is that I only want to take one value from that observable and thereafter,
it should automatically unsubscribe.
So this manages the subscription for me, gives me the latest user and unsubscribes
and I'm not getting future users because I just want to get them on demand when fetch recipes is called,
so whenever this code executes. I don't want to set up an ongoing subscription which gives me users at
a point of time I don't need them anymore.
So thereafter here in subscribe, I get my user object but only once and we don't need to manually
unsubscribe. In there we can then use this HTTP request observable and set it up in there and attach
our token which we get out of the user.
The problem just is here, we're in subscribe of an observable and here, we create yet another observable.
In the end, I want to return this observable here but returning from inside subscribe doesn't work, we have
to return on the top level of this method. The solution is that we pipe these two observables, the user
observable and the HTTP observable together into one big observable and now this is getting a
bit more advanced here, related to RxJS but still, pretty easy to understand in the end. You simply
add another operator here to pipe for the user observable and there, we can use exhaustMap. exhaustMap
is also imported from rxjs/operators and whilst the name might look strange, it does something
very simple. It waits for the first observable, for the user observable to complete which will happen
after we took the latest user. Thereafter, it gives us that user, so in exhaustMap we pass in a function,
there we get the data from that previous observable and now we return a new observable in there which
will then replace our previous observable in that entire observable chain.
So we start of with a user observable and once we're done with that, this will be replaced in that
observable chain with the inner observable we return inside of that function we pass to exhaustMap.
So in there, I will return this HTTP request where I get my recipes. This is now returned inside of exhaust
map and therefore this entire observable chain now switches to this HTTP observable. Now regarding map
and tap which we used before,
we can cut that and since we already are in a pipe method call here and we added take and exhaustMap,
we simply add the other two operators as next steps after the exhaustMap
and then we return this overall observable.
This means that we can still subscribe to that observable returned by fetch recipes and in the end, it
will be an HTTP observable because we switch it here.
We then also apply all the other operations we did and to the outside world,
nothing will change but inside, we utilize this user observable, cut the user out of it
one time only, unsubscribe to that observable and then automatically replace it with a new observable
here.
Now of course, this alone doesn't do everything,
we got the user now,
now we can extract the token
and how do we add the token now to this request?
Well for Firebase and the real time database rest API which we're targeting here, we add a token as a
query parameter in the URL. For other APIs, you add it as a header in the request, for the Firebase
real time database API, you add it as a query parameter.
That's just how it is,
you can read that in the official Firebase docs.
Now to add a query parameter, we got two options -
we can do it manually by setting a question mark and then the parameter name has to be auth,
that is what you can learn to Firebase docs and you set it equal to plus user
token or to not set it manually like this,
you add a second argument to the get method which is an object where you can set the params as you
learned in the HttpClient module and there, you set the new HTTP params object here
where you call set and then you set auth equal to user.token, like that and HTTP params needs
to be imported from @angular/common/http.
Now
what if that token would for some reason be undefined?
If that would happen, we wouldn't have a big problem,
our request would just fail because we send an invalid token to the back-end then but we will later
also add code to automatically log the user out when a token expired,
so we shouldn't even get into such a situation. So let's save that,
let's go back to authenticate and login here and let's now try and fetch data and that looks quite
good.
Here's our data
and if we inspect the network tab and I have a look at this request, this it is, here under headers, let
me increase this a little bit in size, here under headers, you see that this auth parameter was added and
that this is our token
and it seems to work since we fetched all the recipes.
So that is working, which of course is great.